notes.md, before:

---
layout: default
title: "Notes"
---

# Lecture Notes from Certain Courses and Reading

As I have been taking various courses and participating in readings, I have tried to compile some of my notes into LaTeX documentations.
- The LaTeX notes allow me to integrate equations easily while maintaining a clear view.
- These compiled files would be helpful for me when recalling certain materials as well as for others to potentially use on them.

While using these notes, keep in mind that there could be *errors*.
- I could have certain typos or errors while taking notes, so use at your own risks.
- If you have noticed any error, please email me by [Contact](/contact.html) tab.

## Numerical Linear Algebra
The course aims to deal with matrices with complex entries over finite dimensional vector space, with decomposition and computation of eigenvalues and eigenvectors. A motivation of the course is that the computation of determinants is costly and not necessarily tractable. Thus, we want computability and closeness of the computation of eigenvalues. Computational-wise, we are aiming to analyze the accuracy and complexity of each methodology.
- [Link to Notebook](/files/numerical_linear_algebra.pdf)


## Machine Learning
Machine Learning has now become an important subject intersecting computer science and mathematics. There are various topics covered about supervised learning and unsupervised learning with tricks such as boosting data and reducing dimensions. The course also covered basics on causal inference models, in particular, DAGs and Markov Chains.
- [Link to Notebook](/files/machine_learning.pdf)

## Fractal Geometry
This reading is an extension to Real Variables and Measure Theory, where concepts with measure and dimensions have been applied to the fractal world. This note covers various topics among Hausdorff measure and dimensions, as well as some applications about fractal geometry.
- [Link to Notebook](/files/fractal_geometry.pdf)

## Partial Differential Equations
This undergraduate course in partial differential equations covers the heat equations, the wave equations, and the Laplace equations. While the course also explores Fourier series as a way of solving partial differential equations and various models.
- [Link to Notebook](/files/partial_differential_equations.pdf)

Commit message:

updated the cv page with necessary information

notes.md, after:

---
layout: default
title: "Notes"
---

# Lecture Notes from Certain Courses and Reading

As I have been taking various courses and participating in readings, I have tried to compile some of my notes into LaTeX documentations.
- The LaTeX notes allow me to integrate equations easily while maintaining a clear view.
- These compiled files would be helpful for me when recalling certain materials as well as for others to potentially use on them.

While using these notes, keep in mind that there could be *errors*.
- I could have certain typos or errors while taking notes, so use at your own risks.
- If you have noticed any error, please email me by [Contact](/contact.html) tab.

## Stochastic Differential Equations
Introduction to stochastic processes, stochastic differential equations, and their applications in Machine learning models and mathematical finance. Discusses the solutions to stochastic differential equations and how it can help to find numerical results for PDEs.
- Class in progress, so the notes will be updated throughout the semester.
- [Link to Notebook](/files/sdes.pdf)


## Numerical Linear Algebra
The course aims to deal with matrices with complex entries over finite dimensional vector space, with decomposition and computation of eigenvalues and eigenvectors. A motivation of the course is that the computation of determinants is costly and not necessarily tractable. Thus, we want computability and closeness of the computation of eigenvalues. Computational-wise, we are aiming to analyze the accuracy and complexity of each methodology.
- [Link to Notebook](/files/numerical_linear_algebra.pdf)


## Machine Learning
Machine Learning has now become an important subject intersecting computer science and mathematics. There are various topics covered about supervised learning and unsupervised learning with tricks such as boosting data and reducing dimensions. The course also covered basics on causal inference models, in particular, DAGs and Markov Chains.
- [Link to Notebook](/files/machine_learning.pdf)

## Fractal Geometry
This reading is an extension to Real Variables and Measure Theory, where concepts with measure and dimensions have been applied to the fractal world. This note covers various topics among Hausdorff measure and dimensions, as well as some applications about fractal geometry.
- [Link to Notebook](/files/fractal_geometry.pdf)

## Partial Differential Equations
This undergraduate course in partial differential equations covers the heat equations, the wave equations, and the Laplace equations. While the course also explores Fourier series as a way of solving partial differential equations and various models.
- [Link to Notebook](/files/partial_differential_equations.pdf)
