personal.md, before:

---
layout: default
title: "Personal"
---

# Me as a Person

While I would endeavor the academics, I would also devote some time in making something that is not that useful. Here is a secret entry to that!

- [EnDeCript](/EnDeCript/EnDeCript.html)
    - After learning about cryptography and some basic `JavaScript`, I have developed this web-based version to encode and decode English texts.

- <a href="https://bear-resort.github.io" target="_blank">Bear Resort</a>
    - An organization in which I developed to experiment on more interesting ideas, such as emoji, the Bear Resort worldview is a virtual society.

- I have been maintaining two Instagram accounts which are as follows:
    - <a href="http://instagram.com/siyuan_guo/" target="_blank">Public Account</a>: Where I put most of the experiences that is worth sharing.
    - <a href="http://instagram.com/jamesguo_03/" target="_blank">Private Account</a>: Where I try to post newer and more variant stuffs. Higher variances, so possibly better and worse stuffs there.

Commit message:

added shuttle map for Feb 2025

personal.md, after:

---
layout: default
title: "Personal"
---

# Me as a Person

While I would endeavor the academics, I would also devote some time in making something that is not that useful. Here is a secret entry to that!

- [EnDeCript](/EnDeCript/EnDeCript.html)
    - After learning about cryptography and some basic `JavaScript`, I have developed this web-based version to encode and decode English texts.

- [JHU Shuttle Map](/files/JHU-Shuttle-Map-Feb2025.pdf)
    - This map is a topological map for the JHU shuttles. It could help you to know how to traverse between campuses. (Updated February 2025).

- <a href="https://bear-resort.github.io" target="_blank">Bear Resort</a>
    - An organization in which I developed to experiment on more interesting ideas, such as emoji, the Bear Resort worldview is a virtual society.

- I have been maintaining two Instagram accounts which are as follows:
    - <a href="http://instagram.com/siyuan_guo/" target="_blank">Public Account</a>: Where I put most of the experiences that is worth sharing.
    - <a href="http://instagram.com/jamesguo_03/" target="_blank">Private Account</a>: Where I try to post newer and more variant stuffs. Higher variances, so possibly better and worse stuffs there.
